# What is ME/CFS?
ME/CFS short for Myalgic Encephalomyelitis (brain inflammation) is a disabling disease characterised by a profound lack of energy production. If someone with the disease uses too much energy, they can take weeks or months to recover, and in rare cases they never do. The disease is usually lifelong and renders many bedbound with severe cognitive difficulties (thinking takes energy which many patients do not have).

Due to low research funding we do not properly understand how this disease works. It often strikes people between the ages of 15-40, rendering them unable to work or socialise. The disease presents with a dysregulation of the immune system, which is thought to damage the brain and the mitochondria (energy production in cells). The disease is relatively common (~0.6%), and can be caused by various factors, on being a covid infection. Since the beginning of the pandemic, it is thought that cases have doubled. 

Before there was proof the disease was biological, doctors assumed patients with the disease were “hysterical” and dismissed them. Because of the after-effects of this, it is still not taught in most medical schools. Most doctors either do not know of it, or are not aware of the new research showing it is biological. Because of these factors, patients face much stigma and are often gaslit and led to do treatments that are harmful. In fact it takes more than 5 years for the average patient to get diagnosed after becoming disabled since most doctors do not know about the disease. 
