# Climate Change: How Various Inequalities Shape the CO2e Emissions of Societies

Two of the most acute and pervasive political issues today are climate change and rising inequalities. Much has been done in establishing how inequality exacerbates the effects of climate change: poor and disenfranchised populations tend to suffer disproportionally from its impacts and will likely continue to do so. However, the theoretical links between domestic inequalities and their impacts on CO2e emissions aren’t fully fleshed out. In this paper, we will explore different types of inequalities and the literature behind theories about how they impact CO2e emissions at national levels. 

**Income Inequality:**

As explored by Alacevich and Wade (2018) income inequality is increasing, especially in the West; this increase is experiencing surprisingly little pushback. Income inequality has many effects on societal dynamics and economic behaviour, there are therefore various hypotheses about its impact on CO2e emissions. 

One of the ways to measure income inequality is the GINI index, which measures the distribution of income by a number between 0 (everyone gets the same share of income) and 1 (one person gets all the income). Studies have interestingly found that higher levels of income inequality according to the GINI index are often associated with lower carbon emissions (Hailemariam et al., 2020; Heerink et al., 2001). The leading hypothesis behind this is that the rich already pollute large amounts, therefore an increase in income for them will lead to little change in emissions. However, the poor cannot afford to consume and therefore do not emit much; hence, when their income is increased will consume marginally more and therefore pollute more. This is referred to as “marginal propensity to emit” and means that higher income equality leads to negative outcomes for CO2e emissions. 

Another way to look at inequality through income is by looking at the earnings of the top 10% compared to the rest. When using this metric, an increase in inequality is linked to higher CO2e emissions, seemingly contrastingly to the findings of the GINI index (Hailemariam et al., 2020; Knight et al., 2017). An explanation could come from the fact that increased top-income inequality is linked to heightened “status-based consumption” and therefore working longer hours (Bowles & Park, 2005; Cushing et al., 2015). Therefore, the higher the difference between rich and poor, the more important “status” is in society and the more motivated individuals are to emulate the consumption of the highest classes and to work hard to join those high classes. In doing so consumption and economic output are increased which leads to higher emissions. This phenomenon has been dubbed the “Veblen Effect”. Other mechanisms help explain these findings; they will be explored in the “power” section of this essay. Another small aspect that is becoming increasingly relevant is the dispersion of environmentally innovative consumer goods and services. It has been found that in countries where the gap between the richest and middle classes is high, access to environmentally innovative consumer goods and services is often a privilege associated with higher income levels (Vona & Patriarca, 2011). 

Therefore, although there are two seemingly contradictory findings, they may be explained by the same mechanism. It seems that when any class of society gets wealthier, their emissions increase (at least in the short term). This means that when increased equality means the poorer classes getting richer (as often measured by the GINI index) emissions rise. However, when increased equality means the richer classes lose some of their advantages (as measured by top income inequality) emissions fall.

**Horizontal Inequality:**

Horizontal inequality refers to inequalities between groups based on societally or culturally perceived characteristics, such as race, ethnicity, residential status, and social class. It is an important type of inequality because it impacts the prospects and actions of all individuals in the groups and is notoriously hard to escape (Stewart, 2009). There are no large-scale data analyses directly exploring a possible relationship, however, there are myriad mechanisms that may have an impact. 

Firstly, large horizontal inequalities often lead to increased segregation, namely in housing. It seems evident that larger segregation leads to more urban sprawl, longer commute times, and less reliable transport networks, all of which are linked to increased car usage and CO2e emissions. In fact, a study of US cities found that higher segregation leads to higher air pollution (Morello-Frosch & Jesdale, 2006). It must also be kept in mind that horizontal inequality may lead to spatial inequalities in CO2e emissions. The larger the difference between areas, the more different their emissions will be. Richer areas tend to have high consumption-based emissions but outsource production-based emissions (industry) to poorer areas (Pattison et al., 2014). 

Additionally, when there is large inequality between groups in a horizontal and spatial dimension, climate-friendly legislation is likely to be more harmful. This is because, in societies with high spatial and horizontal inequalities, high CO2e industrial production is localised to specific areas and groups. Climate policy that seeks to lower emissions will have a hard time passing as entire groups will be opposed to it, in this sense, higher horizontal inequalities would lead to higher CO2e emissions. Finally, horizontal inequalities often lead to a specific wealthy group that separates themself away from the areas most impacted by climate change and often has a strong influence over the media. Therefore, they often don’t show the extent of the climate crisis for personal and group-based gains. Thus, multiple mechanisms explain why horizontal inequality could increase CO2e emissions. 

**Political Inequality:**

Political inequality, defined as inequalities in the political power and influence of groups, is heavily tied to wealth. It has been shown that increased wealth of the top percentiles of society is correlated with higher CO2e emissions (Knight et al., 2017). Therefore, increased political inequality may lead to higher greenhouse gas emissions. 

In general, the most powerful have the most to gain from CO2e emissions: they have more to gain from increased consumption and production and the least to lose in the effects of climate change. These incentives, paired with the fact that these are the most politically powerful strata of society, leave little reason for decreases in CO2e emissions. This hypothesis was advanced by Boyce’s (1994) political economy model of inequality and environmental degradation, which accounts for winners and losers. He explains that the powerful classes have a higher tendency to emit due to extravagant consumption and ownership of often high-emitting firms, while the rest bear the consequences of which they are the most vulnerable to such as air pollution, displacement, and natural disasters (Mohai et al., 2009). This powerful class additionally possesses the political and economic power necessary to avoid costly environmental protection often advanced by policymakers. This creates a feedback loop in which the powerful gain the benefit from emissions while the rest bear the consequences (Ciplet et al., 2015); the powerful, therefore, gain extra wealth and power while the rest stay marginalised. An example of this that stems from electoral politics is that in the United States, the wealthiest (often the most powerful), vote the most and are the least supportive of climate policy (Page et al., 2013). 

Downey (2015) elaborates upon the ideas advanced by Boyce, by arguing that the most powerful work to create entities and establishments separate from democracy and popular influence to strengthen their power and wealth, which often ends with environmentally destructive consequences. One example of this is using tools like the media and education to suppress public awareness about climate change and reframing pro-environmental behaviour to benefit the elite. This often leads to a lack of societal trust, solidarity, and support for public goods, which contributes to a disregard for climate concerns.

**Discussion & Conclusion:**

In this essay, various literature has been combined to attempt to understand the possible theoretical mechanisms behind different types of inequalities and their effects on societal CO2e emissions. This question and relationship are crucial to understand in a world struggling with both climate change and inequalities. While there are some pervasive mechanisms, it seems many factors influence this relationship on different levels, which makes it extremely complex. On top of this, these factors often influence each other with various causalities and feedback loops. The mechanisms explored in the essay are summarised in the flowchart “Figure 1”; this attempt at simplification, however, shows how complex any representation of this relationship can be, whether visually or textually expressed. Additionally, there exists many other types of inequality (educational, gender etc.) and lenses to view inequality which could provide novel mechanisms and relationships not explored in this essay. 

Income inequality seems to have different effects depending on what the dynamics are. For each increase in income, people at the bottom of the scale seem to emit more than the richest (different marginal propensity to emit), however, concentrating large amounts of income in the top 10% has strong societal effects (through the “Veblen Effect”) which end in higher societal emissions. 

Horizontal inequality, through various mechanisms, seems to be detrimental towards environmental causes. These effects include the side effects of segregation and group identity politics, which often lead to disregarding climate-friendly policies. Then, the segmentation leads to a lack of unity and solidarity which negatively impacts any large-scale effort to thwart climate change. 

Finally, political inequality, analysed through Boyce and Downey’s model leads to policies that advantage the powerful class. The most powerful often use their power to reap the benefits of CO2e emissions while leaving the negative consequences to the rest. This is seen through various mechanisms of influence such as the media, lobbying, direct voting and much more. 


Figure 1

Therefore, while the mechanisms are not explicitly clear, one can see a link between inequalities and CO2e emissions. The rich tend to emit more, and many types of inequalities, seem to increase this tendency and provide mechanisms against a change from this status quo. Therefore, when drafting policies to tackle CO2e emissions, inequality in its various forms should be considered, to make sure the ones suffering the consequences aren’t solely the most marginalised, while the ones reaping the benefits are the most powerful, just as it has largely been up until now. Additionally, societies with less inequality in all dimensions seem to be better suited to deal with climate change and emit less. Therefore, I believe inequality in all its forms is a crucial factor in the fight against climate change. 



**Bibliography:**

Bowles, S., & Park, Y. (2005). Emulation, Inequality, and Work Hours: Was Thorsten Veblen Right? The Economic Journal, 115(507), F397–F412. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-0297.2005.01042.x
Boyce, J. K. (1994). Inequality as a cause of environmental degradation. Ecological Economics, 11(3), 169–178. https://doi.org/10.1016/0921-8009(94)90198-8
Ciplet, D., Roberts, J. T., & Khan, M. R. (2015). Power in a Warming World: The New Global Politics of Climate Change and the Remaking of Environmental Inequality. The MIT Press. https://www.jstor.org/stable/j.ctt173zmmq
Cushing, L., Morello-Frosch, R., Wander, M., & Pastor, M. (2015). The Haves, the Have-Nots, and the Health of Everyone: The Relationship Between Social Inequality and Environmental Quality. Annual Review of Public Health, 36(1), 193–209. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-publhealth-031914-122646
Downey, L. (2015). Inequality, Democracy, and the Environment. NYU Press. https://www.jstor.org/stable/j.ctt15zc7mc
Hailemariam, A., Dzhumashev, R., & Shahbaz, M. (2020). Carbon emissions, income inequality and economic development. Empirical Economics, 59(3), 1139–1159. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00181-019-01664-x
Heerink, N., Mulatu, A., & Bulte, E. (2001). Income inequality and the environment: Aggregation bias in environmental Kuznets curves. Ecological Economics, 38(3), 359–367. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0921-8009(01)00171-9
Knight, K. W., Schor, J. B., & Jorgenson, A. K. (2017). Wealth Inequality and Carbon Emissions in High-income Countries. Social Currents, 4(5), 403–412. https://doi.org/10.1177/2329496517704872
Mohai, P., Pellow, D., & Roberts, J. T. (2009). Environmental Justice. Annual Review of Environment and Resources, 34(1), 405–430. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-environ-082508-094348
Morello-Frosch, R., & Jesdale, B. M. (2006). Separate and Unequal: Residential Segregation and Estimated Cancer Risks Associated with Ambient Air Toxics in U.S. Metropolitan Areas. Environmental Health Perspectives, 114(3), 386–393. https://doi.org/10.1289/ehp.8500
Page, B. I., Bartels, L. M., & Seawright, J. (2013). Democracy and the Policy Preferences of Wealthy Americans. Perspectives on Politics, 11(1), 51–73. https://doi.org/10.1017/S153759271200360X
Pattison, A., Habans, R., & Clement, M. T. (2014). Ecological Modernization or Aristocratic Conservation? Exploring the Impact of Affluence on Carbon Emissions at the Local Level. Society & Natural Resources, 27(8), 850–866. https://doi.org/10.1080/08941920.2014.911996
Stewart, F. (2009). Horizontal Inequality: Two Types of Trap. Journal of Human Development and Capabilities, 10(3), 315–340. https://doi.org/10.1080/19452820903041824
Vona, F., & Patriarca, F. (2011). Income inequality and the development of environmental technologies. Ecological Economics, 70(11), 2201–2213.
Wade, R. H., & Alacevich, M. (2018). Why Has Income Inequality Been Neglected in Economics and Public Policy? In P. Arestis & M. Sawyer (Eds.), Inequality (pp. 323–365). Springer International Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-91298-1_8

